readme.md, before:

# Berka Banking Dataset (`./data`)

This folder contains the Berka Czech bank dataset used for the CDP Public Cloud POC. Each CSV represents an entity in the retail banking domain (clients, accounts, products, and transactions).

## Files and Schemas

- `account.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Bank accounts held by clients.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `account_id` – unique account identifier.  
    - `district_id` – link to the client’s geographic district (see `district.csv`).  
    - `frequency` – statement frequency (e.g. monthly fee payments).  
    - `date` – account creation/opening date.

- `card.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Payment cards issued on accounts.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `card_id` – unique card identifier.  
    - `disp_id` – link to disposition/role on an account (see `disp.csv`).  
    - `type` – card type (e.g. classic, gold).  
    - `issued` – card issuance timestamp.

- `client.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Bank clients (customers).  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `client_id` – unique client identifier.  
    - `birth_number` – encoded birth date / demographic key.  
    - `district_id` – home district (links to `district.csv`).

- `disp.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Dispositions – the relationship between clients and accounts.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `disp_id` – unique disposition identifier.  
    - `client_id` – link to `client.csv`.  
    - `account_id` – link to `account.csv`.  
    - `type` – role of the client on the account (e.g. OWNER, DISPOSER).

- `district.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Reference data describing geographic districts.  
  - **Notes:**  
    - Columns `A1`–`A16` capture attributes such as region name, population, unemployment, crime statistics, and other socio‑economic indicators used for segmentation and analytics.

- `loan.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Loans associated with accounts.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `loan_id` – unique loan identifier.  
    - `account_id` – link to `account.csv`.  
    - `date` – loan start/approval date.  
    - `amount` – principal amount of the loan.  
    - `duration` – loan duration (in months).  
    - `payments` – regular installment amount.  
    - `status` – loan status/quality flag (e.g. paid, default).

- `order.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Payment orders initiated from accounts.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `order_id` – unique payment order identifier.  
    - `account_id` – source account.  
    - `bank_to` – destination bank code.  
    - `account_to` – destination account identifier.  
    - `amount` – transfer amount.  
    - `k_symbol` – payment/contract code (e.g. SIPO, UVER).

- `trans.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Detailed account transaction history.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `trans_id` – unique transaction identifier.  
    - `account_id` – link to `account.csv`.  
    - `date` – transaction posting date.  
    - `type` – direction of transaction (e.g. PRIJEM = credit, VYDAJ = debit).  
    - `operation` – operation type (e.g. deposit, withdrawal, transfer).  
    - `amount` – transaction amount.  
    - `balance` – resulting account balance after the transaction.  
    - `k_symbol` – purpose code / reference.  
    - `bank`, `account` – counterparty bank and account (if applicable).

These structures form the core relational model for the POC: clients live in districts, hold accounts, are linked via dispositions, can have cards and loans, and generate orders and transactions that drive downstream analytics, BI, and ML use cases in CDP.

## Logical ER Model

At a logical level:
- `district` defines geographic areas for both `client` and `account`.  
- `client` is linked to `account` through `disp` (disposition), which captures each client’s role on an account.  
- `card` is issued at the `disp` level (one disposition may have zero or more cards).  
- `loan`, `order`, and `trans` are all financial events tied directly to an `account`.

```mermaid
erDiagram
    DISTRICT ||--o{ CLIENT : "has residents"
    DISTRICT ||--o{ ACCOUNT : "serves"

    CLIENT ||--o{ DISP : "has disposition"
    ACCOUNT ||--o{ DISP : "is held by"

    DISP ||--o{ CARD : "has card"

    ACCOUNT ||--o{ LOAN : "has loan"
    ACCOUNT ||--o{ ORDER : "creates order"
    ACCOUNT ||--o{ TRANS : "has transaction"

    DISTRICT {
        int district_id
        string name
        string region
    }
    CLIENT {
        int client_id
        string birth_number
        int district_id
    }
    ACCOUNT {
        int account_id
        int district_id
        string frequency
        date opened_date
    }
    DISP {
        int disp_id
        int client_id
        int account_id
        string type
    }
    CARD {
        int card_id
        int disp_id
        string type
        datetime issued
    }
    LOAN {
        int loan_id
        int account_id
        date start_date
        decimal amount
        int duration_months
        decimal payments
        string status
    }
    ORDER {
        int order_id
        int account_id
        string bank_to
        string account_to
        decimal amount
        string k_symbol
    }
    TRANS {
        int trans_id
        int account_id
        date date
        string type
        string operation
        decimal amount
        decimal balance
        string k_symbol
        string bank
        string account
    }
```

Commit message:

Rebase dates to 2025 and key Kafka generator

readme.md, after:

# Berka Banking Dataset (`./data`)

This folder contains the Berka Czech bank dataset used for the CDP Public Cloud POC. Each CSV represents an entity in the retail banking domain (clients, accounts, products, and transactions).

## Files and Schemas

- `account.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Bank accounts held by clients.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `account_id` – unique account identifier.  
    - `district_id` – link to the client’s geographic district (see `district.csv`).  
    - `frequency` – statement frequency (e.g. monthly fee payments).  
    - `date` – account creation/opening date.

- `card.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Payment cards issued on accounts.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `card_id` – unique card identifier.  
    - `disp_id` – link to disposition/role on an account (see `disp.csv`).  
    - `type` – card type (e.g. classic, gold).  
    - `issued` – card issuance timestamp.

- `client.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Bank clients (customers).  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `client_id` – unique client identifier.  
    - `birth_number` – encoded birth date / demographic key.  
    - `district_id` – home district (links to `district.csv`).

- `disp.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Dispositions – the relationship between clients and accounts.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `disp_id` – unique disposition identifier.  
    - `client_id` – link to `client.csv`.  
    - `account_id` – link to `account.csv`.  
    - `type` – role of the client on the account (e.g. OWNER, DISPOSER).

- `district.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Reference data describing geographic districts.  
  - **Notes:**  
    - Columns `A1`–`A16` capture attributes such as region name, population, unemployment, crime statistics, and other socio‑economic indicators used for segmentation and analytics.

- `loan.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Loans associated with accounts.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `loan_id` – unique loan identifier.  
    - `account_id` – link to `account.csv`.  
    - `date` – loan start/approval date.  
    - `amount` – principal amount of the loan.  
    - `duration` – loan duration (in months).  
    - `payments` – regular installment amount.  
    - `status` – loan status/quality flag (e.g. paid, default).

- `order.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Payment orders initiated from accounts.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `order_id` – unique payment order identifier.  
    - `account_id` – source account.  
    - `bank_to` – destination bank code.  
    - `account_to` – destination account identifier.  
    - `amount` – transfer amount.  
    - `k_symbol` – payment/contract code (e.g. SIPO, UVER).

- `trans.csv`  
  - **Purpose:** Detailed account transaction history.  
  - **Key fields:**  
    - `trans_id` – unique transaction identifier.  
    - `account_id` – link to `account.csv`.  
    - `date` – transaction posting date.  
    - `type` – direction of transaction (e.g. PRIJEM = credit, VYDAJ = debit).  
    - `operation` – operation type (e.g. deposit, withdrawal, transfer).  
    - `amount` – transaction amount.  
    - `balance` – resulting account balance after the transaction.  
    - `k_symbol` – purpose code / reference.  
    - `bank`, `account` – counterparty bank and account (if applicable).

These structures form the core relational model for the POC: clients live in districts, hold accounts, are linked via dispositions, can have cards and loans, and generate orders and transactions that drive downstream analytics, BI, and ML use cases in CDP.

## Date Conventions

- Historic dates in the original Berka CSVs have been re-based to the year 2025 so that the dataset looks “current” for the POC (for example, `930101` → `250101`, corresponding to 2025‑01‑01).  
- Date fields remain encoded as `YYMMDD` (or `YYMMDD hh:mm:ss` for card issue timestamps), preserving original month/day patterns while shifting the calendar year.

## Logical ER Model

At a logical level:
- `district` defines geographic areas for both `client` and `account`.  
- `client` is linked to `account` through `disp` (disposition), which captures each client’s role on an account.  
- `card` is issued at the `disp` level (one disposition may have zero or more cards).  
- `loan`, `order`, and `trans` are all financial events tied directly to an `account`.

```mermaid
erDiagram
    DISTRICT ||--o{ CLIENT : "has residents"
    DISTRICT ||--o{ ACCOUNT : "serves"

    CLIENT ||--o{ DISP : "has disposition"
    ACCOUNT ||--o{ DISP : "is held by"

    DISP ||--o{ CARD : "has card"

    ACCOUNT ||--o{ LOAN : "has loan"
    ACCOUNT ||--o{ ORDER : "creates order"
    ACCOUNT ||--o{ TRANS : "has transaction"

    DISTRICT {
        int district_id
        string name
        string region
    }
    CLIENT {
        int client_id
        string birth_number
        int district_id
    }
    ACCOUNT {
        int account_id
        int district_id
        string frequency
        date opened_date
    }
    DISP {
        int disp_id
        int client_id
        int account_id
        string type
    }
    CARD {
        int card_id
        int disp_id
        string type
        datetime issued
    }
    LOAN {
        int loan_id
        int account_id
        date start_date
        decimal amount
        int duration_months
        decimal payments
        string status
    }
    ORDER {
        int order_id
        int account_id
        string bank_to
        string account_to
        decimal amount
        string k_symbol
    }
    TRANS {
        int trans_id
        int account_id
        date date
        string type
        string operation
        decimal amount
        decimal balance
        string k_symbol
        string bank
        string account
    }
```
